---
title: The Real Real on Software Product Management
publish_date: Jul 20th, 2024
cover: team.png
excerpt: "Building successful software products requires agility in experimentation, innovation, and decision-making. When engineers are head down focused on implementing new capabilities, a need for a leader and visionary to represent the product as a whole is met by PMs."
---
The role of a product manager has been glorified by tech (Google, Meta, Microsoft) and tech-savvy (e.g. Amazon, Netflix, Stripe, AirBnb) companies. Building successful software products requires agility in experimentation, innovation, and decision-making. When engineers are head down focused on implementing new capabilities, a need for a leader and visionary to represent the product as a whole is met by PMs. Let’s break down some in’s and out’s. 

# Vision & Ownership

A common phrase in the PM world is that `"A Product Manager is the CEO of the product"`. For the majority of products, this is an exaggeration and might create confusion and serves no good. In mature tech companies, the product organization is large with layers of leadership & management. This leaves most PMs responsible for a portion of the product, and even for that piece, deciding which features get implemented, major product pivots, and resource allocation involves directors, VPs, and even the Chief Product Officer (CPO). 

Most PMs do not resemble a CEO as they lack the top-down influence power, the experience in running a full business, managing the board and shareholders, and setting broader strategy. You might argue that a director of product can own a full product and might be a step closer to running that product as a company, with clear analytics and financial statements, but even that is less feasible as CEO’s manage financial, legal, HR, Comms, and multiple products. It’s worth noting that a rare selection of enterprises, perhaps Netflix, trust and empower individual contributors to make big decisions and own the final outcome. The same applies at Meta, where PMs tend to be more empowered and entrepreneurial. 

Put more accurately, a PM is the `Face of the product`. A PM ideates and shares responsibilty with lead engineers and designers in product discovery, collaborates with product marketing to define the brand and messaging, partners with revenue and customer success to ensure the product is solving real-world problems and gather customer feedback, keeps a strong tab on the industry and attends key conferences, and speaks for the product to internal stakeholders. Finally, there’s a lot of truth behind the clichés of “Customer obsession” and “Fall in love with the problem, not the solution”, and PMs must firmly cultivate that mental model. 

> "When the company achieves enterprise stage, product work is turned into design by committee" — Marty Cagan

# Keys to Success

Make no mistake; the role of a PM is a challenging one and demands thick skin. If you can visualize the below points, you’ll understand that this role is chronically stressful. You serve as a parent to the product. Below are key challenges that PMs face: 

1. Context switching: Shifting between ideating, user research, designing, building, speaking & presenting, writing, problem-solving, discussing, testing, project management, marketing, evangelizing, data analysis, managing stakeholders, and collaborating. The challenge is not only in the different hats to wear rather in the need to shift gears rapidly, often within 2-3 minutes in back to back fashion as you hop between meetings and timeblocks to get things done
2. C-suite management: you’ll often present to executives, both internal and external. This requires mastery of presenting, reading the room, managing bureaucracy, and managing yourself. One component of this is the high-stakes curve balls that get thrown at you to answer on the spot to influence decisions impacting product roadmap and revenue
3. Ownership: similar to leadership, you are responsible for an area regardless of why outcomes don’t materialize. In essence, you must continuously juggle tens of balls and predict when each might fall. When one does drop, you don’t make excuses, remediate, and pivot. Another face of ownership is unblocking your team, especially engineers, from bureacracy and unnecessary distractions and cultiavte an environment where they feel safe and empowered to innovate
4. Prioritization: You’ll have a massive to-do list that will never hit the bottom. Prioritization to ensure the team is focused on delivering the top 2-3 priorities (OKR’s) and being in peace with some objectives falling through the cracks is one of the skills you must master. I follow an *Eisenhower Matrix* style of priorites to refocus myself and make quick decisions. This is where the old adage of getting comfortable saying ‘no’ comes into play. Fast-paced cultures tend to require many small decisions rather than large strategic ones, and those micro-decisions are guaranteed to keep you on your feet
5. Culture: A strong PM sets the culture on the team. Your level of empathy, innovation, experimentation, agility, openmindedness, collaboration, vulnerability, communication, style of communication, and performance will serve as implicit guidance for the rest of the team. You share this culture-setting responsbility with the engineering manager and product leadership. Have fun while you’re at it! 

> "In the end, great product managers make things happen.  Reliably, and without fail, you can always tell when you’ve added a great product manager to a team versus a mediocre one, because very quickly things start happening" — Adam Nash

# Program Management ≠ Product Management

From an outsider perspective, PM often bundles project managers, program managers, and product managers, and this is especially the case in non-software companies where the need for a PM role is less defined (think supply chain). Product Managers understand how software is built. They don’t have to professionally code, but ideally they’re able to put together a demo application and understand system design concepts enough to understand engineering architectures and taken decisions. This indicates they understand the end-to-end lifecycle of building software products, and can apply it to small scale. This konwledge is rudimentary to empathize with the engineering team(s), UX designers, data analysts, and the rest of the team. Ideally as a PM, you can comprehend the challenges each team member faces. Think for example of upgrading a backend from C# to Rust, adopting a React frontend, or a change of cloud providers. Understand what impact each of these has on the infrastructure, support, communication, performance, design, limitations, cost, and tooling is helpful for the PM as they need to represent the product. i.e. you must understand, not implement. 

Project/Program Management on the other hand is less focused on building the product and more on ensuring a business function is delivered. Examples of programs include community management, GRC and auditing, public affairs, investor relations, partnerships, training & certification, safety & ethics, and privacy. In essence, program managers lean more into cross-functional communication, change mangaement, and collaboration. The two roles do share the aspects of stakeholder management and leading without authority and I’m sure many can transfer between the two worlds seamlessly, but the roles themselves pose different challenges. A Product Manager, for instance, must deeply understand both the industry and customer (user personas) and hold higher technical aptitude. 

p.s. an exception in titles here is at Microsoft, where PMs take a Program Manager title. 

# Engineering ≠ Product Management

It’s not uncommon for business-savvy engineers to pivot into the world of product management. Engineers who manage to make the transition successfully understand the differences between creating products and representing them to customers and stakeholders. These are two largely different skillsets and modes of operation. PMs are responsible of the *what* and *why*, and should engineers figure out the *how.* 

A challenge to many engineers when making the pivot is the mastery of presenting, writing, and context-switching. A PM is an operator; an engineer is a builder. You’re hopping the fence over to a new method of operating that’ll solidfy a different side of you, not just how you spend your hours at work.  

The PM role differs from company to company and team to team. If you’re interviewing to join a new team, make sure to ask what responsibilities and expectations are PMs tasked with. Organizations are typically either product-led or engineering-led. One of the two tends to have more influence over product direction and is granted higher decision-making authority. Understand that aspect of the culture as well as it’ll be crucial to your success on the team. Note that regardless of who has higher authority, you *always* influence engineers rather than inform them.

---

# References

- [1] Inspired: How to Create Tech Products Customers Love — Marty Cagan (2nd Ed) [link](https://amzn.to/3WxOfDt)
- [2] Cracking the PM Interview: How to Land a Product Manager Job in Technology — Gayle McDowell & Jackie Bavaro [link](https://amzn.to/3LCgICE)
- [3] Be A Great Product Leaders — Adam Nash https://adamnash.blog/2011/12/16/be-a-great-product-leader/