# Mental Models to Cultivate

Join me as I share some paradigms that form a positive and productive mindset. I do my best to nurture and practice the below but needless to say this is by no means an exhaustive list. For now, brace yourself for a plethora of quotes and Thank You for reading!  

## Welcome Failure<sup>[5]</sup>

> An expert is a person who’s made all the mistakes that can be made in a narrow field — Niels Bohr
> 

Failure is part of the process. Time and again we learn how failure is a main ingredient in the recipe of success. It can teach you things success cannot. Accepting that the path towards growth requires experimentation and a lot of trial and error is a kinder mindset to cultivate than one of perfectionism and a self talk track of guilt when mistakes are made. I’ll even go further and say that If you’re not continuously failing a bit, you’re mostly stagnating. 

There is of course a healthy level of failure to continue growing without it bringing you down. We each need to learn our comfort levels and push slightly beyond that. Some studies suggest it’s 10-15% failure rate<sup>[12]</sup>.

A similar note on rejection of work is that it is not a judgement of who you are. It’s not personal. Rejection in a professional context could point you to areas you can mature further. It’s a decisive form of feedback, which inherently requires an amount of security to handle. 

> “No one ever is defeated until defeat has been accepted as a reality.” — Napoleon Hill
> 

## “Us” Mindset

I’m lucky to have lived in two regions of the world; Growing up in the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) then moving to the US in my later twenties. My lived experience, often validated by others who’ve made similar moves from the east, emphasizes how individuality is more vivid and foundational in the west, leading to increased competition and narrower collaboration. The truth is that nothing major was accomplished alone and we all build on the work of others. 

You can continue to elevate what you consider a team you’re member of. Starting with the immediate family and work team, to the social group resembling your beliefs and the organization you work for, to the nation you are resident of, and eventually to a world citizen. We’re blessed to be living in days where globalization is continuously expanding and technology is connecting people across the globe, increasing collaboration, and breaking down barriers in geolocation, language, and culture. 

Looking at the world with a lens of acceptance and a preconception that *everyone is your best friend* is much favorable and soul nourishing. Belonging is a warm and beautiful feeling and a powerful antidote to loneliness, depression, and anxiety. 

> Talent wins games, but teamwork and intelligence wins championships. — Michael Jordan
> 

Now, where competition is still unavoidable, such as business and sports, considering team success over individual success is again a healthier mindset where the larger success and impact you made as a member of a team who uplifts others will resonate much broadly and memorably than individual accomplishments, including those that are significant and admirable. 

## Generosity & Reciprocity

I recently went to an AI/ML networking events solo and eager to meet some smart people. It was 6pm after a long busy work day, and you probably already know, networking events can be a hit or miss. There are good odds you won’t make new meaningful connections. The beginning was mostly brief conversations as people “speed-met” and once people got sorted into their interests, began the deeper conversations. At that point I noticed the few pairs that seemed to be meaningfully enjoying their chats and making new meaningful connections. These folks were pouring their knowledge out and sharing details, passionately and enthusiastically, and in return receiving the other person’s stories and joy. Those were the ones that turned this social experience into valuable memorable night and made a handful of new acquaintances. Networking events are more prone to turning into a “What can I take out of this interaction” series of short impersonal conversations where stepping in with generosity and leaning on a mindset of giving rather than taking could help achieve what the event is designed for; to make new connections. 

This goes for every aspect of life, big or small. Send a postcard or letter to a friend or coworker and you’re likely setting a new ritual between the two of you. Send a care package when a friend is sick and you’re likely to find one at your door when you are down too. 

> The wise man does not lay up his own treasures. The more he gives to others, the more he has for his own. — Lao Tzu
> 

## Excitement and Optimism

Optimism is somehow a self-fulfilling prophecy. By looking at the glass half-full you experience life positively and peacefully. You also attract the same, and inspiring that in others. In *A Ride of a Lifetime*, Bob Iger shares his view on leadership principles and advocates for an optimistic leader. There is a subtle form of strength and ownership in a leader that chooses to carry the burden of ambiguity when the tide is high and assures his followers that they will find their way out. 

You can always find the positive in any situation. Matter of fact, It’s perhaps necessary to nurture the soul and mind to find meaning in suffering and make peace with the highs and lows of life<sup>[6]</sup>.

> Do you not see how necessary a world of pains and troubles is to school an intelligence and make it a soul? — Keats
> 

## Acceptance & Reducing Bias

> I think unconscious bias is one of the hardest things to get at. — Ruth Bader Ginsberg (RBG)
> 

As we learn our own mental models, beliefs, values, and habits (actions), we can analyze and observe where we err. This is also a point of balance where we do need to make hundreds of snap judgements and micro-actions throughout every day but we must we notice when we have caused harm or influenced others negatively. The *Fundamental Attribution Error (FAE)* states that we do not attribute to malice what can be explained by circumstances. 

Think of the last time a driver cut you off or changed lanes without signaling. Or the last time someone was speaking obnoxiously loud. These are no representations of who these people are and are only examples of actions they have taken. We all make these errors, and often. What I like about the FAE is that It nourishes the soul with practicing acceptance, understanding, and care for others. It is a practice that unites us rather than divides us. And eventually, I feel less frustration and resentment by not exaggerating these innocent acts when they occur. 

> Possessing bias is part and parcel of being human. And the more we think we are immune to it, the greater the likelihood that our own biases will be invisible or unconscious to us. — Howard J. Ross (Everyday Bias)
> 

## Learn by Doing

We wear many hats in our daily lives and shift to the skillset we employ from being an operator to a creator. You are a creator when you’re building a new product, writing a new article, or designing a new building. You are an operator when you’re selling, marketing, resolving conflict, and managing complexity. These two core modes of operation require largely different skills and it’s very difficult to switch between the two. To complicate matters, we live in complex societies where we are responsible largely for our own. You are your own financial advisor, career advisor, fitness coach, psychotherapist, personal assistant, legal advisor, clinician, life coach, and many more. Clearly, you won’t be an expert in all to the same degree as professionals, but you must accept your responsibilities. I say this is all to frame how much there is to do for each of us, and emphasize the difficulty to carve out time to fully focus and experiment in order to learn; to learn by doing. Yet, this is very much a practice to aspire for on a daily basis.

I see this concept adopted very well in the tech industry. GitHub calls this *Ship to Learn.* Amazon calls it *Bias for Action*. The underlying message is the same: to not get stuck in analysis paralysis and lean towards doing.

> For the big decisions you have to make, you’re never going to have all of the information or consensus you want — Marillyn Hewson
> 

This model is at the core of building a product or business. It’s heavily about how fast can you experiment and learn; the *Rate of Experimentation & Learning* enables you to get to market first and establish yourself as the thought leader in your domain. That you are the one rolling up your sleeves and getting things done. 

> It is not the critic who counts; not the man who points out how the strong man stumbles, or where the doer of deeds could have done them better. The credit belongs to the man who is actually in the arena, whose face is marred by dust and sweat and blood; who strives valiantly; who errs, who comes short again and again... who at the best knows in the end the triumph of high achievement, and who at the worst, if he fails, at least fails while daring greatly. — Theodor Roosevelt
> 

## Alignment & Intentionality

> If a man knows not to which port he sails, no wind is favorable — Seneca
> 

Perhaps the most cumbersome model to attain; to be as detailed and aligned to your own values as possible in your actions. Not only is it a life-long journey to learn in-depth who you truly are and discover your values, but also the challenge of mastering your actions and aligning those two together. Much easier said than done. 

If you follow a Buddhist philosophy in life, you see this model described as *Self Actualization*; to **be** and **live** the truest form of yourself. At which point, you have no worries for what is not in alignment of that. The perfect FOMO antidote. 

This is also what the popular books of wisdom preach; those timeless works that transcend generations including *The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People*, *Think and Grow Rich*, and *Breaking the Habit of Being Yourself*. 

> A burning desire to be and to do is the starting point from which the dreamer must take off. Dreams are not born of indifference, laziness, or lack of ambition. — Napoleon Hill
> 

By “Intentionality”, I refer to the detailed visualization and choice of action in a given domain. Think about applying intentionality to your career for example. How can you take on roles that you are passionate about, and by doing so setting yourself up for success as you’re doing what you really want to do in life. It’s no longer a “job” in the traditional sense of work. You can apply intentionality to every aspect of life. You can be intentional about finding your life partner, closing that business deal, and becoming a subject matter expert. 

> Whatever the mind can conceive and believe, the mind can achieve — Napoleon Hill
> 

## Build a System of Productivity

Following how scarce our resources are (cognitive capacity, physical energy, and time), we must use them efficiently. Diligence in your productivity practices of choice to free yourself from waste is going to prove critical for your ability to accomplish what you aspire to. Here are a few of mine:

- First 1-2 hours of the day have the highest cognitive ability. Invest them on creative work, not reactive (operations) work. No emails or texts
- Avoid checking email nonstop unless you’re in a role requiring fast responses, such as sales, customer support, and customer success.
    
    > Email is a great way for other people to put their priorities into your life — Kevin Kruse
    > 
- Prioritization as there will always be more to do. Aspire to work on strategic long-term goals and prioritize those over urgent ones. Recall the Pareto principle where the top 20% of your actions produce the top 80% of your results.
- Delegate what you can; Every Yes is a No to something else.
    
    > What differentiates very successful people from successful ones is saying No more often - Warren Buffett
    > 
- Work off a calendar, not a to-do list
- Any task that takes less than 5 minutes should be done immediately
- Meet only when that’s the best path to communicate; If a task can be clarified or done asynchronously, opt for that to save your interpersonal capacity.
    
    > not all meetings are a waste of time, some are canceled
    > 

## Managing yourself

I find immense joy in conquering my own. Whenever I’m triggered, frustrated, stressed, or overwhelmed, and I am not acting with kindness and clarity, I see the need to manage myself. To reign in my emotions, words, and actions, and in that I find a sort of elevated sense of accomplishment. In particular, can I uphold my self to speaking with kindness, acting to create or remove obstacles, and instill peace in those around me. Can I make a positive impact in the small actions I take all-day long. It goes without saying but as the rider, I often lose control of the elephant. I’ve found that in those times, It’s best for me to move. A long walk works wonders! 

> One can have no smaller or greater mastery than mastery of oneself - Leonardo DaVinci
> 

To train and practice self management, the first step is adding a pause between the trigger (seeing, hearing, touching, thinking) and reaction. It’s in managing your emotions and guiding your thoughts that you regain control of yourself. The second step lies in breaking down what your traits are, whether you can trace them back to the experiences that have shaped them or not, and choosing what the new trait to adopt instead will look like, before training your brain to act it. A large part of psychotherapy revolves around this exact process of tracing back. Remember, you are not your body nor your brain. You are the rider, not the elephant.

> Between stimulus and response there is a space. In that space is our power to choose our response. In our response lies our growth and our freedom. — Viktor E. Frankl

We are emotional actors! We are highly intuitive beings who act first, and justify later. Our beliefs, convictions, and values are far less “rational” than we imagine. — Jonathan Haidt (The Happiness Hypothesis)
> 

## Aiming High & Mastery

> If you think you can, you can. If you think you can’t, you can’t. Either way, you’re right
> 

There’s much to admire in those who live life at the edge of human knowledge and dream big. The entrepreneurs who’ve changed history and pushed for substantial change. Thinking of Jeff Bezos’s initiative in the field of Cloud Computing resulting in large efficiencies and environmental saving. Similarly how Elon Musk’s Tesla challenged the status quo in the Auto industry and created momentum for manufacturers to adopt Electric Vehicles (EVs) technology faster. These are two simple examples from two media-controversial figures that have vastly influenced our lives and our children’s for generations to come. These changes might not have been scripted ahead of time to reach this extreme success but nonetheless are visionary endeavors that place both Bezos and Musk as global leaders of our time. The list goes on and on in all fields and I’m sure we all have our heroes in mind. Is it a scientist (Galileo, Newton, Einstein), philosopher (Descartes, Marx, Nietzsche), artist (Michelangelo, Monet, Dali), leader (George Washington, Gandhi, MLK Jr.), business gurus (Henry Ford, Bill Gates), writer (Rumi, Shakespeare, Wilde), or an athlete (Mohammad Ali, Pele, Usain Bolt)? 

> Imagination is more important than knowledge. Knowledge is limited. Imagination encircles the world - Albert Einstein
> 

Of course, you don’t need to reach that level of historical significance but the message of not keeping limiting beliefs is what I’m driving for with these examples of mastery. The added layer of this mastery is that you’re now on the frontiers. No one can guide you or tell you what to do next.

## Processing and Recovery via Meditation

Our most precious resource isn’t simply time, rather, it’s our cognitive and emotional capacity. Then, how do we replenish that without sleep? So far, I’ve found two practices personally to help me regain some of that during the day.

Meditation: a practice to rest, calm, and quiet the mind. Our brains operate at a wide range of frequencies. Beta brain waves (13-32 Hz) are when we are doing, communicating, tinkering, and getting things done. Meanwhile, alpha (8-13 Hz) and theta (4-8 Hz) are when we are relaxing, meditating, and dreaming. The latter are states of recovery and replenishment. No wonder do you see meditation positioned as a tool for clarity, battling anxiety, and processing emotions and thoughts. I am no meditation expert, though I’ve been practicing the Silva method of meditating perhaps twice a week or so. In this method, you get into a quiet environment, remove distractions, and count down from 100 to 1 with a single digit with every breath. Some days I make it to 90, others to 70, and frankly, rarely to 20. Even with that, any amount helps me slow down and get into a slower brain waves that enables me to get into a creative mode of operation. 

Meditation is also time for you to review what’s transpired since you’ve last taken a breath. To review what you’ve experienced, process what’s ambiguous or unresolved, and organize learnings into your knowledge bases. It supplements that process that occurs during sleep with awake moments. I enjoy reviewing the day in those last minutes before falling asleep, as If I’ve just saved everything from my cache memory (Hippocampus) to disk memory. 

> “Meditation is the discovery that the point of life is always arrived at in the immediate moment.” – Alan Watts

“Meditation is offering your genuine presence to yourself in every moment.” – Thich Nhat Hanh

“Meditation is the dissolution of thoughts in eternal awareness or pure consciousness without objectification, knowing without thinking, merging finitude in infinity.” – Voltaire
> 

## Growth

Meditation is also a powerful tool of change. The thought here is that change occurs at a neural level. For you to change requires you to alter the ingrained patterns of thinking, physiologically represented by solidified neural pathways. 

So how do you “rewire” your brain? The answer lies in applying intentionality to who you want to be. In *Breaking the Habit of Being Yourself*, Dr. Joe Dispenza discusses how our personalities distill over time to become automatic. We do not choose our reactions, rather, we simply let our bodies dictate our feelings, and our feelings influence our reactions. 

Meditation and visualization are the tools you practice to think of every detail of the person you’d like to be, whether that’s a new personality trait, a new career role, or a new relationship dynamic. Earlier this year, my mother passed away and It took a few months to rethink and redefine how my relationship with father and brother needed to adapt. How often do we talk? What topics do we dive into that were saved for Mom? How to balance the friendship and father/son? 

Meditation removes your attention from the environment, your body, and the passing of time so you can focus on your intentions and thoughts instead. Meditating is also a means for you to move beyond your analytical mind (Neocortex) so that you can access your subconscious mind (Cerebellum). That’s crucial, since the subconscious is where all your bad habits and behaviors that you want to change reside.

I find it extremely beautiful how we each continuously grow and change throughout the years. You might not feel it in the day to day, but If you contemplate who you were just five years back, you’d notice what a different person from who you are today; hopefully wiser, kinder, and existing in more peace. 

> Intellectual growth should commence at birth and cease only at death. — Albert Einstein
> 

---

## References

- [1] Super Thinking: The Big Book of Mental Models (2019)
- [2] Breaking the Habit of Being Yourself (2016)
- [3] 7 Habits of Highly Effective People
- [4] Be Useful — Arnold Schwarzenegger
- [5] Rejection Proof — Jia Jiang
- [6] The Art of Happiness — Dalai Lama
- [7] Think and Grow Rich — Napoleon Hill
- [8] 15 Secrets Successful People Know About Time Management, Kevin Kruse
- [9] How Bad Do You Want It
- [10] CEO Excellence
- [11] Deep Work — Cal Newport
- [12] Huberman Lab: Using Failures, Movement, and Balance to Learn Faster https://www.hubermanlab.com/episode/using-failures-movement-and-balance-to-learn-faster (Apr’21)
- [13] Thinking Fast and Slow — Daniel Kahneman

